# CoreJava Note -1 
## Introduction to Programming and Java 

### **Software**
-  It is a solution—an automated solution for real-world problems.
-  It is a set of programs used to develop applications according to business requirements.
### **Program**
-  A set of instructions given to the machine for a specific task.
### **Programming Language** 
-  The language used to write a set of instructions.
-  **Examples:** C, C++, Java, Python, C#, Ruby.
-  To execute the program, we need a platform.
### **Platform**
-  It is a place that runs (executes) a program.
-  It is a combination of software (OS) and hardware (microprocessor).
-  Without a platform, we cannot run the program.
---
### History of Programming Languages
-  C
    - In the 1970s, C was introduced.
    -  These were platform dependent and procedure or function-oriented.
    -  For example, a large company with 250 employees is working on a project and wants to communicate, it is impossible to work only with C language.
- C++
    -  In the 1980s, C++ was introduced.
    -  It is a object oriented and platform dependent
    -  Suppose people living in different countries work on the same project. Still, communication is not possible with C/C++, so to overcome this, Java was introduced.
-  Java
    -  Java is object-oriented (building applications in objects) and platform independent (meaning the application built on one platform can be executed on a different platform).
---
### Java
-  High-level, object-oriented programming language
-  Platform independent
-  Platforms Java can run on: Windows, Mac, Linux, Android
---
### Platform independent 
-    The code developed on one system can be executed on another system with a different operating system (as long as JVM is present). This is called platform independence.
---
### Class
-    A class is a `logical entity`; it gets life once an object is created
-    A class is a blueprint or master copy of an object.
-    A class is a `non-primitive data type`.
-    Without a class, we cannot create an object.
-    If any object is destroyed or modified, it does not affect any other object or the class itself.
-    By using a single class, we can create multiple similar objects.

#### How to create a class
```
class className {
    # Data Members
    # Methods
    # Nested Classes
    # Blocks
    # Constructors
}
```
#### Filename Rule
- For Java programs, the file name should match the class name.
- Example:
```
class Employee { }
// Filename: Employee.java
```
---
### Object
-    A physical entity
-    It is a real-world entity.
-    An instance of a class.
-    Each object has two aspects:
      1. States (Data Members/Variables)
         - Description / Information / Details of an object
         - Technically we call it as Data Memebers
      2. Behaviours (Methods)
         - Action perform by the object
         - Technically it as Methods
---
### Keywords
- These are predefined words in Java, always written in `lowercase`.
- Java is `case-sensitive` (e.g., class is different from CLASS).
#### **List of Java Keywords**
```bash
boolean, byte, char, double, float, short, void, int, long, while, boy, do, switch, break, continue, catch, default, else, try, catch, finally, class, abstract, extends, create, final, import, new, instance, of, private, interface, native, public, package, implements, protected, return, static, super, synchronized, this, throw, throws, transient, volatile
```
---
### Identifiers
- The naming component that gives unique names to Java members.

**Rules for Identifiers**
- Should not contain whitespace.
- Can contain numbers but must not start with a number.
- Cannot contain special characters except $ (dollar) and _ (underscore).
- Should not use any reserved keywords.
---
###  WORA (Write Once, Run Anywhere)
- Java follows a two-step process
1. **Compilation:** Checks the syntax. If correct, generates bytecode; else, shows error.
2. **Execution (using JVM)**: Interprets the bytecode.
#### Compilation Example:
```
class Employee { }
```
- Use javac Employee.java to compile, which generates a .class file with bytecode.
#### Bytecode
- Bytecode is not high-level nor low-level—it is intermediate language, platform independent.
- It is generated by the compiler and interpreted by the JVM.
- Stored in .class files.
---
### JVM – Java Virtual Machine
- Converts `bytecode into machine-level`
- jvm is a `platform dependent` i.e., windows jvm is different from mac jvm, each OS has its own JVM.
- JVM is a virtual machine or plaform(software only) that sites onn the actual platform
- JVM is an engine or environment for running or executing .class files.
-  As the name indicates, JVM is a `virtual machine`, not a physical component. It is a set of instructions written in `C language`.
- JVM is responsible for `allocating memory` in Java.

---

### SDK [ JDK - Java Development Kit]
```
JDK
 ├── Development Tools
 │     ├─ javac
 │     ├─ JavaP
 │     ├─ java cons
 │     └─ Java lib
 └── JRE
       ├─ lib
       ├─ API
       └── JVM
              └─ JIT 
```
#### **JDK**
- JDK is SDK (Software Development Kit). It contains necessary resources to `compile as well as to execute java` based application programs.
- JDK internally contains JRE.

#### ** JRE (Java Runtime Environment)**
- JRE is a runtime Environment which is required to `execute java applications or bytecode`.
- JRE can be downloaded separately.
-  Using JRE we can not develop Java program.

#### ** JIT Compiler (Just-In-Time Compiler)**
- It is a component of runtime Environment (JRE) which is used to `improve the performance` of a Java application
---
### Data Members: Variables and Constants
1. **Variables**
   - Place to store data or it is aname given to a memory location
   - Variable value/data is not fixed , can change value.
   - Must be declared with access modifier, data type, and optionally initialized with a value.
   ```
    int a = 40;      // Declaration & Initialization
    double b = 30.5; // Declaration & Initialization
    int c;           // Declaration only
    c = 40;          // Assignment
   ```

2. **Constant**
   - Fixed values
   - cannot change after assignment.
   - Declared using the final keyword.
   ```
   final double pi = 3.14;
    final String dob = "02/02";
   ```
---
### Access modifiers 
- Define the accessibility / visibility of Java members (classes, variables, methods)
1. public
   -  This is the highest visible access modifier
   -  we can access public members inside the class, outside the class, inside the package & outside the package.
   -  All the Java member can be public.
2. protected
   -  we can access protected members inside class, outside the class & inside package.
   -  For protected members want to access outside the package have to perform inheritance.
3. default
   - we can access default access modifier inside the class /outside the class & inside the package.
4. private
   - private members can be access with class
   - This is least visible access modifier.
   - **NOTE** : class can’t be private.
---
   






























